# GM01102: CMD

@ George Madeley
@ Personal Studies
@ 8/7/23

### Introduction

These are a collection of notes regarding the basic pieces of
information that every programmer needs to know that can be applied to
all coding projects. These notes will go into how to use the Linux
command line, git, GitHub, and many more.

### Contents

[Introduction](#introduction)

[Contents](#contents)

[Section 1: Command Line](#command-line)

[1 - Navigating The File System](#navigating-the-file-system)

[2 - Viewing and Changing the File System](#viewing-and-changing-the-file-system)

[3 - Redirecting Input and Output](#redirecting-input-and-output)

[4 - Configuring the Environment](#configuring-the-environment)

[5 - BASH to windows command prompt translation](#bash-to-windows-command-prompt-translation)

[Section 2: Bash Scripting](#bash-scripting)

[1 - BASH Scripting](#bash-scripting-1)

## Command Line

### Navigating The File System

#### File System

A file system organises a computers files and directories into a tree
like structure.

#### The Commands

The following is a list of commands:

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ls      This lists all folders and files inside a directory.
  ------- ----------------------------------------------------------------
  pwd     This prints the current working directory.

  cd      This changes the directory to the specified directory. '..'
          means go back up by one directory.

  mkdir   This makes a directory with a given name.

  touch   This command creates a file with a given name and suffix.

  clear   This clears the terminal.
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Viewing and Changing the File System

#### LS revisited.

We can add options to the ls command:

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  -a   List all contents, including hidden files and directories.
  ---- ------------------------------------------------------------------
  -l   List all contents of a directory in long format, as well as the
       file permissions.

  -t   Orders files and directories by the time they were last modified.
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

#### LS and combining options.

The -l option lists files and directories as a table. Here, there are
four rows:

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1\.   Access Rights      these indicate the read, write, and execute
                           permissions on the file or directory allowed to
                           the owner, the group, and all users.
  ----- ------------------ -------------------------------------------------
  2\.   Number of Hard     this number counts the number of child
        Links              directories and files.

  3\.   Username           The username of the file's owner.

  4\.   Group Name         The name of the group that owns the file.

  5\.   File size          The size of the file in bytes.

  6\.   Date and time      The date and time that the file was last
                           modified.

  7\.   Name               The name of the directory.
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### CAT

The cat command outputs the contents of a specified file. For example:

```text
cat hello.txt
```

This command peaks at files without opening.

#### CP

The cp command copies files or directory. For example:

```text
cp source.txt target.txt
```

We could also copy a file to a destination directory:

```text
cp source.txt destination/
```

To copy multiple files into a directory, use cp with a list of source
files as the first arguments, and the destination directory as the last
argument:

```text
cp source1.txt source2.txt destination/
```

#### Wildcards

We can use special characters like \* to select groups of files.

These special characters are called wildcards.

```text
cp * destination/
```

In the example below, w\*.txt selects all files in the working directory
starting with w (prefix) and ending with .txt (suffix) and copies them
to my-directory/.

```text
cp w*.txt my-directory/
```

#### MV

The mv command moves files. This has the same format as the cp command.

```text
mv my-file.txt my-directory/
```

To rename a file, use mv with the old file name as the first argument
and the new file name as the second argument.

```text
mv old-file.txt new-file.txt
```

#### RM

The rm command deletes files and directories.

```text
rm unwanted-file.txt
```

The -r is an option that modifies the behaviour of the rm command. The
-r stands for recursive and is used to delete a directory and all its
child directories.

```text
rm -r unwanted-directory
```

The rm command deletes files and directories permanently.

### Redirecting Input and Output

Through redirection you can direct the input and output of a command to
and from other files and programs, and chain commands together in a
pipeline. The echo command accepts a string as standard input and echoes
the string back as a standard output.

```text
$ echo "hello"
hello
```

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Standard Input     (stdin) is information inputted into the terminal
                     through the keyboard or input device.
  ------------------ ----------------------------------------------------
  Standard Output    (stdout) is the information outputted after a
                     process is run.

  Standard Error     (stderr) is the error message outputted by a failed
                     process.
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

Redirection reroutes standard input, standard output, and standard error
to or from a different location.

#### The \> command

\> takes the standard output of the command on the left and redirects it
to the file on the right.

NOTE: \> overrides all original content in the destination file.

```text
cat oceans.txt > continents.txt
```

#### The \>\> command

What if we want to be able to add to a file without losing the original
text.

```text
cat deserts.txt >> forests.txt
```

\>\> takes the standard output of the command on the left and appends it
to the file on the right.

#### The \< command

\< takes the standard input from the file on the right and inputs it
into the program on the left.

```text
cat < deserts.txt
```

#### The \| command

\| is a "pipe." The \| takes the standard output of the command on the
left and pipes it as standard input to the command on the right. You can
think of this as "command to command" redirection.

```text
cat volcanoes.txt | wc
```

In the above example, the standard output of cat volcanoes is piped into
the standard input of wc.

Multiple \| commands can be changed together:

```text
cat volcanoes.txt | wc | cat > islands.txt
```

#### Sort

Sort takes the standard input and orders it alphabetically for the
standard output.

```text
sort continents.txt
```

In the example below, the command takes the standard output from cat
glacies.txt and "pipes" it into sort. The standard output of sort is
redirected to a new file named sorted-glacies.txt.

```text
cat glaciers.txt | sort > sorted-glaciers.txt
```

#### Uniq

Uniq stands for "unique." It filters out adjacent duplicate lines in a
file.

Note: uniq will only filter out duplicate data if it was adjacent so you
must sort the data first.

#### Grep

Grep stands for "global regular expression print." It searches files for
lines that match a pattern and then returns the results. It is also case
sensitive.

```text
grep America continents.txt
```

Grep -i enables the command to be case insensitive.

```text
grep -i America continents.txt
```

Grep -R searches all files in a directory and outputs filenames and
lines containing matches results. -R stands for "recursive."

```text
grep -R Artic workplace/geographic
workplace/geographic/deserts.txt: Artic Desert
workplace/geographic/oceans.txt: Artic Ocean
```

Grep -RL searches all files in a directory and outputs only filenames
with matched results.

#### Sed

Sed stands for "stream editor." It accepts standard input and modifies
it based on an expression, before displaying it as output data. It is
like "find and replace."

```text
set 's/snow/rain/' forest.txt
```

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  S      Stands for 'substitution.' It is always used when using sed for
         substitution.
  ------ ----------------------------------------------------------------
  Snow   The search string, or the text to find.

  Rain   The replacement string or the text to add in place.
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

The above command only replaces the first word.

```text
sed 's/snow/rain/g' forest.txt
```

In the above command, g means globally meaning all instances are
replaced.

The command so far only changes the command line output, to change the
actual file, we use the -i option.

```text
sed -i 's/snow/rain/g' forest.txt
```

### Configuring the Environment

Each time we launch the terminal application, it creates a new session,
the session immediately loads settings and preferences that make up the
command line environment. We can configure the environment to support
the commands and programs we create.

#### Nano

```text
nano hello.txt
```

Nano is a command line text editor.

#### Bash Profile

A Bash profile is a file used to store environment settings for your
terminal, and it is accessible by the following name:

```text
~/.bash_profile
```

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  \~    Represents the user's home directory.
  ----- -----------------------------------------------------------------
  .     Indicates a hidden file.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

To open and edit the bash profile, you can use the command:

```text
nano ~/.bash-profile
```

When you edit the bash profile, you can add commands to execute every
time a new terminal session is started. For example, if you have an echo
statement in the bash profile, that will echo when a terminal session
begins.

To activate the changes made in the bash profile, for this current
session, use this following command:

```text
source ~/.bash_profile
```

#### Aliases

One type of setting you can create is called an alias:

```text
alias pd="pwd"
```

The alias command allows you to create keyboard shortcuts, or aliases,
for commonly used commands.

#### Environment Variables

Environment variables are variables that can be used across commands and
programs and hold information about the environment.

```text
export USER="Jane Doe"
```

To access the variable in the terminal, we use the following command:

```text
$USER
```

#### PS1 Environment Variable

PS1 is an environment variable that defines the makeup and style of the
command prompt.

```text
export PS1=">>"
```

The above command does the following:

```text
$ pwd
>> pwd
```

#### HOME Environment Variable

The HOME variable is an environment variable that displays the path of
the home directory \~. You can specify and change the HOME variable if
needed, but in most cases, this is not necessary.

#### PATH Environment Variable

PATH is an environment variable that stores a list of directories
separated by a colon. The PATH variable simply lists which directories
contain scripts.

#### Env

The env command stands for "environment" and returns a list of the
environment variables for the current user.

To select the value of a particular environment variable, let us say
PATH, you can use the following command:

```text
env | grep PATH
```

### BASH to windows command prompt translation

#### Navigation

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Mac/Linux                           Windows
  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------
  ls                                  dir

  pwd                                 chdir

  cd                                  cd

  mkdir                               md

  touch                               echo "hello word" \> hello.txt

  clear                               cls
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Manipulation

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Mac/Linux                           Windows
  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------
  cat                                 type

  cp                                  copy

  mv                                  ren

  rm                                  Del
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Redirection

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Mac/Linux                           Windows
  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------
  \>                                  \>

  \|                                  \|

  \>\>                                \>\>

  grep                                find
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Environment

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Mac/Linux                           Windows
  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------
  env                                 set

  export VAR=value                    setx variable value

  Echo \$VAR                          echo %VAR%
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

## Bash Scripting

### BASH Scripting

There are some conventions to follow to ensure that your computer can
find and execute your BASH scripts. The beginning of your script file
should start with:

```text
##!/bin/bash
```

When saving the script file, it is good practice to place commonly used
scripts in the \~/bin/ directory.

The script files also need the "execute" permission to allow them to
run. To add this permission to a file with file name: script.sh use:

```text
chmod +x script.sh
```

To ensure that scripts in \~/bin/ are available, you must add this
director to your PATH within your configuration file:

```text
PATH=~/bin:$PATH
```

#### Variables

Variables can be declared by doing the following:

```text
greeting="Hello"
```

To access the variable, do the following:

```text
echo $greeting
```

#### Conditionals

Conditions start with if and end in fi. The conditional statement is
surrounded by \[\]. The then command begins the code that will run if
the condition is met.

```text
if [$index -lt 5] then
  echo $index
else
  echo 5
fi
```

Here is a list of comparison operators:

- Equal -eq

- Less than or equal -le

- Less than -lt

- Is null -z

- Not equal -ne

- Greater than or equal -ge

- Greater than -gt

When comparing strings, it is common practice to put the variable in
quotes and use the following comparison operators:

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Equal                                              ==
  -------------------------------------------------- --------------------
  Not equal                                          !=

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

```text
if["$foo"=="$bar"]
```

#### Loops

There are three different ways to loop within a bash script: for, while,
and until. A for loop iterates through a list.

```text
for word in $paragraph
do
  echo $word
done
```

A while loop loops through some code whilst a condition is true. The
until loop loops through some code until a condition is true.

```text
while [$index -lt 5]
do
  echo $index
  index=$((index+1))
done

until [$index -eq 5]
do
  echo $index
  index=$((index+1))
done
```

1. arithmetic in Bash scripting uses the \$((...)) syntax and within
    the brackets the variable name is not prepared with a \$.

#### Inputs

To get a user input, we use the read command.

```text
echo "Guess a number"
read number
```

Another way to get inputs is from when the user enters the file name and
input arguments.

```text
saycolors red blue green
```

These arguments can then be accessed using \$1, \$2, and \$3 where \$1
is red. If your script has an undefined number of input arguments, you
can iterate over them using the \$@ syntax.

```text
for color in "$@"
do
  echo $color
done
```

We can also access files:

```text
files = /some/directory/*
```

#### Aliases

You can set up aliases for your bash scripts within your .bashsrc or
.bash-profile file to allow calling your scripts without the full
filename.

```text
alias saycolors ='./saycolors.sh'
```

