# GM01202: C

@ George Madeley
@ Personal Studies
@ 6/13/24

### Introduction

This is a collection of notes that I, George Madeley, took when taking
the Codecademy C course. I do not take ownership of the material covered
and these notes should only be used for educational purposes.

### Contents

[Introduction](#introduction)

[Contents](#contents)

[Section 1: C](#c)

[1 - Hello World](#hello-world)

[2 - Variables](#variables)

[3 - Operators](#operators)

[4 - Conditionals](#conditionals)

[5 - Loops and Errors](#loops-and-errors)

[6 - Arrays and Strings](#arrays-and-strings)

[7 - Pointers and Memory](#pointers-and-memory)

[8 - Functions](#functions)

[9 - Structures](#structures)

## C

### Hello World

#### Hello World

Let's start off with a basic hello world function:

```text
##include <stdio.h>
int main() {
  // output a line
  printf("Hello, World!
");
}
```

We must include stdio.h so that we can run the printf command.
Everything else is self-explanatory.

#### Syntax and Errors

We know about syntax but below are two important ones to watch out for:

- Use double-quotations for strings,

- Use lower-case characters for functions.

#### Output

We all know what printf() does, but what about the \\n? this is called
an escape sequence and is used to add a non-visual character within a
string. In this case, \\n adds a new line to the ned of the string.

#### Comments

Comments can be made with // or with /\*...\*/.

#### Compiling

A widely used C compiler is GCC which stands for GNU Compiler
Collection, Let's look at how we ca compile helloworld.c to the
"helloworld" executable.

To compile, we need to run the following command in a terminal:

```text
gcc helloworld.c -o helloworld.exe
```

If you do not understand the above code, please refresh your knowledge
on the CMD.

To run our executable, we can use the following command:

```text
./helloworld
```

### Variables

#### Naming Standards

- Names can be composed of upper- and lower-case letters, numbers, and
  underscores.

- The first character must be a letter (upper or lower case)

- No keywords are allowed as the full name, i.e., int is not allowed but
  int_name is.

#### Data Types

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Data Type**                       **Description**
  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------
  int                                 A whole number

  float                               Several decimals

  double                              Several decimals

  char                                Stores are characters
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

Variables are defined as follows:

```text
type name
```

#### printf 

The printf() function allows us to print strings dynamically:

```text
int day = 3;
printf("Hellow World, today is the %drd!", day);
```

The compiler will replace %d with the contents of day.

There are lots of optional formatting and parameter types that can be
used, here are a few:

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Symbol**                          **Type**
  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------
  %d or %i                            int

  %f                                  double or float

  %c                                  char
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Floats and doubles: what's the difference?

Floats have less precision than doubles. 6 vs 15 possible decimal
places.

1. Doubles take up 8 bytes rather than floats 4 bytes, but doubles also
    run faster.

#### Constants

Constants are special types preventing any changes during execution once
the value has been set at declaration.

```text
const int DAYSINWEEK = 7;
```

1. It is best practice to use all caps when declaring a const.

#### Casting Types

If I ever want to change a variable type, I do the following:

```text
int a = (int)b;
```

But what about changing a char to an int? in the backend, the char is
just storing the numerical representation of the character. If char was
holding 'a', it would be storing 97. Therefore, in the following code,
number would equal 97.

```text
int number;
char character = 'a';
number = (int)character;
```

The opposite happens when you set an int to a char.

### Operators

#### Mathematical Operators

Of course we know the basic mathematical operation like add and subtract
but what about the others?

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Operator**                        **Symbol**
  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------
  Addition                            \+ or +=

  Subtraction                         \- or -=

  Multiplication                      \* or \*=

  Division                            / or /=

  Modulo                              \% or %=

  Increment                           ++

  Decrement                           \--
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Comparisons

What about comparators?

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Comparator**                      **Symbol**
  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------
  Equals                              ==

  Greater than                        \>

  Less than                           \<

  Greater than or equal to            \>=

  Less than or equal to               \<=

  Not equal                           !=
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Logical Operators

And now logical operators:

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Logic**                           **Symbol**
  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------
  AND                                 &&

  OR                                  \|\|

  NOT                                 !
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

### Conditionals

#### If Statement

The syntax for the if statements are as follows:

```text
if (condition) {
  // code here
}
```

#### Else clause

The syntax for an else statement is as follows:

```text
if (condition) {
  // code here
} else {
  // code here
}
```

#### Else if

The syntax for an else if statement is as follows:

```text
if (condition) {
  // code here
} else if (condition) {
  // code here
} else {
  // code here
}
```

#### Switch Statement

The following is the syntax for a switch statement:

```text
switch (grade) {
  case 9:
  printf("Freshman");
  break;
  case 10:
  printf("Sophomore");
  break;
  default:
  printf("Other");
  break;
}
```

#### Ternary Operator

The only other time you have seen a ternary operator is in JavaScript.
Below is the following syntax:

```text
condition ? do something : do something else
```

A better example:

```text
min = a < b ? a : b;
```

### Loops and Errors

#### While Loops

The following is the syntax for a while loop:

```text
while (condition is true) {
  // code here
}
```

#### Do-While Loops

The following is the syntax for the do-while loop:

```text
do {
  // code here
} while (condition);
```

But what makes a do-while loop different to a while loop? If the
condition in a while loop is not true, the code inside will not run,
however, if the condition in a do-while loop is not true, the code
inside will run once. A way to think about the flow of the code is to
check the position of the condition check.

#### For Loop

The following is the syntax for a for loop:

```text
for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
  printf("%d
", i);
}
```

#### Break

You can use the break command to stop a loop from executing.

```text
break;
```

#### Continuing

Continue simply skips the rest of the code and allows you to start the
next iteration.

```text
continue;
```

### Arrays and Strings

#### Creating and Initialising Arrays

To create an array, we use the following code:

```text
int age[4];
```

Or:

```text
int age[] = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5};
```

#### Array Access and Element Modification

To access and modify elements within an array, we use the following
syntax:

```text
age[idx] = newValue;
```

#### Length of Array using sizeof()

To find the size of an array, we simply use the following code:

```text
int len = sizeof(arr);
```

sizeof() simply returns the number of bytes the array takes up in
storage. To find the length of the array, we divide its size by the type
that was used:

```text
int len = sizeof(arr) / sizeof(int);
```

#### Multidimensional Arrays

How do we define a multidimensional array?

```text
int mat[3][4];
```

Or:

```text
int mat[][3] = {{1, 2, 3}, {4, 5, 6}, {7, 8, 9}};
```

#### Element Access in Multidimensional Arrays

To access an element in a multidimensional array we do the following:

```text
mat[rowNum - 1][colNum - 1] = value;
```

To prevent the hardcoding of dimensions in a loop, the sizeof() function
is used as follows:

```text
int rowDim = sizeof(mat) / sizeof(mat[0]);
int colDim = sizeof(mat[0]) / sizeof(dataType);
```

#### Creating and Initiating Strings

Strings can be created in one of two ways:

##### Method 1:

```text
char str[] = {'H', 'e', 'l', 'l', 'o', ' '};
```

The '\\0' character is known as the null terminator character. It
signifies the end of the string and must be included.

##### Method 2:

```text
char str[] = "Hello";
```

You must use double quotation marks.

#### Character Access and Modification

We can access characters in a string the exact same way we do with
arrays however, we cannot add or delete characters.

#### Looping Through Strings

We can also loop through strings using a for loop or while loop just
like arrays. We can also use the following function to find the length
of the string:

```text
int len = strLen(str);
```

However, you will need to include the following library:

```text
##include <string.h>
```

1. strLen() does not account for the null terminating character.

#### Concatenating Strings

Using the above library, we can also use a function to concaternate
strings.

```text
strcat(dst, src);
```

The above function will store the result in dst.

#### Copying Strings

We can also copy strings using the above library.

```text
strcpy(dst, src);
```

1. The empty string, dst, must be initialised with a length that is
    greater than or equal to the original string plus the null
    character.

### Pointers and Memory

#### Pointers

A byte of memory can be accessed using a pointer. A pointer containing
the address of a variable is said to *point* to that variable.

The syntax of a pointer is:

```text
dataType* nameOfPointer;
```

For example, to declare a pointer variable (called ptr) that points to
an int, you would write:

```text
int* ptr;
int *ptr;
```

1. The \* can go on either side, however, which ever you choose, keep
    with it and do not deviate.

To print a pointer, you need to use the %p tag.

#### Reference Operator

We need to obtain this address first. This is done by using the
reference operator &. The syntax for this is:

```text
int *ptr = &var;
```

#### The Dereference Operator

The data contained in memory address pointed to by a pointer can be
accessed using the dereference operator \*.

```text
int value = *ptr;
```

#### Pointer Arithmetic

Only basic arithmetic such as addition and subtraction can be used on
pointers.

#### Pointers and Arrays

If we have an integer array, we can use pointers and pointer arithmetic
to iterate through the array to access or manipulate its values.

```text
int arr[10] = {2, 4, 7, 1, 10, 3, 11, 6, 20, 5};
int* ptr = &arr[0];
for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
  printf("%d
", *ptr);
  ptr++;
}
```

#### Memory Allocation

C provides four special functions for you to dynamically allocate and
release memory, provided its available.

- malloc -- use this function to reserve as many bytes as you want on
  the heap.

- calloc - Use this function to reserve memory for some number of ints,
  doubles, or any other data type.

- realloc -- use this function to expand or contract a block of reserved
  memory 9reserved by either malloc() or calloc()).

- free -- use this function to release previously allocated memory.

All of these functions are stored within the stdlib library.

### Functions

#### Library Functions

C gives us access to many useful libraries that include many different
functions for you to use. In order to have access to these functions,
you need to include header files like \<stdio.h\> and \<stdlib.h\>.

- ceil() -- takes any number as an argument, rounds it up to the nearest
  integer, and returns the integer.

- log() -- takes an integer as an argument and returns the natural
  logarithm of the given number,

- toupper() -- takes a char as an argument and returns the uppercase of
  any alphabetical character.

- isupper() -- takes a char as an argument and returns 1 is the
  character is an uppercase letter, 0 otherwise.

#### Defining Functions

To define our own functions, we need three things:

- The function name.

- How many parameters (inputs) and their types.

- What type of return value is to be expected.

```text
returnType functionName(parameter1, parameter2, ...) {
  // code
}
```

Just like in C#, if a function is not going to return anything, we use
the word void as the return type.

#### Function Return Values

To return a value in C, we use the return keyword.

```text
return value;
```

#### Functions with Pointers

When the function receives an argument, the function makes a copy of the
arguments value and stores it in the parameter variable. Now any work
that the function does on that parameter variable will not affect the
original value passed in.

But what if we want to modify the original variable? We can use
pointers!

```text
void myFunc(int* a) {
  *a = *a + 2;
}
```

The function will now make a copy of the memory address. This address
points to the variable location allowing us to edit it like in the
example above.

To call the function, we use the following command:

```text
int age = 21;
myFunc(&age);
```

#### Function Prototypes

All the functions we declare have to be placed before the main function.
But this can get messy. Luckily, function prototypes save us here!

We can declare the function before the main function but implement them
after.

```text
int upperFunction(int, int);

int upperFunction(int a, int b) {
  return a + b;
}
```

In our function prototypes, out parameter names are not required.

### Structures

#### What are Structures?

Structures allow programmers to create user-defined data types.
Structures, like arrays, allow you to collect many data types into one
single data type.

#### Defining a Structure

Below is the syntax to define structures:

```text
struct Bottle {
  char* name;
  int maxCapacity;
  int currentCapacity;
}
```

#### Initialising Structures

How do we initialise or struct?

```text
struct Bottle bottle1 = {
  .name = "Water Bottle",
  .maxCapacity = 1000,
  .currentCapacity = 500
};
```

#### Structure dot Notation

To access the data, we use the dot notation:

```text
bottle1.currentCapacity = 750;
```

If the variable does not exist within the struct, it will be created and
assigned the value.

#### Structure Pointers

How do we assign a pointer to a struct:

```text
struct Bottle myBottle = { "Water Bottle", 1000, 500 };
struct Bottle* ptr = &myBottle;
```

To access member variables with ptr and the dot operator we can use the
following syntax:

```text
(*ptr).currentCapacity = 600;
```

Arrow notation can also be used with pointers to structures, as it
implicitly does the dereferencing for you.

```text
ptr->currentCapacity = 600;
```

